---
title: Swirrl
summary: 
layout: post
permalink: /library/swirrl
created: 25/6/2012
revised: 27/6/2012
resources:

categories:

---

<p><strong>Swirrl</strong></p>
<p><em>Swirrl is a Stirling and Manchester based SME specialising in publishing linked data.</em></p>
<p><a href="http://swirrl.com/" rel="nofollow">Swirrl</a> is a micro SME, based in Stirling and Manchester, specialising in technology for publishing ‘5-star’ linked open data.</p>
<p>Swirrl’s main product is PublishMyData, a linked data publishing platform.  This provides the technology and infrastructure needed to publish linked data, together with a flexible framework for presenting the data to users, both via web pages and APIs.  This is currently offered as a fully hosted and managed service, with an open source Community Edition scheduled for release in early 2012.</p>
<p>Few people want to work directly with raw data: the priority with PublishMyData is to make the work of ‘data intermediaries’ as easy as possible: enabling the creation of applications, visualisations and value-added data services. Using PublishMyData as a basis, Swirrl helps data owners to publish their data in useful ways.  Swirrl is involved in developing end-user applications itself as well as supporting other developers to do so.</p>
<p>Next for Swirrl is demonstrating the value of open data, not just for transparency, but also for building value-added services for use by the public, businesses and government itself.  Data publishers need to provide high quality data through reliable APIs that fit the needs of developers.  Developers need to focus on concrete value for end users.  We’re in the early days, but these things are coming.</p>
<p>Website: <a href="http://swirrl.com/" rel="nofollow">http://swirrl.com</a></p>
