---
title: Local Public Data Panel – fifth meeting 21 October 2010
summary: 
layout: post
permalink: /library/local-public-data-panel-%E2%80%93-fifth-meeting-21-october-2010
created: 16/11/2010
revised: 31/3/2014
resources:
    - filename: Local Public Data Panel - 9 Sept_Minutes_FINAL_1.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/Local Public Data Panel - 9 Sept_Minutes_FINAL_1.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
    - filename: 101020_Local Public Data Panel_Agenda 21 Oct_Revised Final.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/101020_Local Public Data Panel_Agenda 21 Oct_Revised Final.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
    - filename: 101025_Local Public Data Panel_21st October Minutes_Final.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/101025_Local Public Data Panel_21st October Minutes_Final.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
    - filename: 101019 Local Public Data Panel data list.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/101019 Local Public Data Panel data list.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
    - filename: 101019 New Contracts and Tenders 500 Data Panel Paper IC GS V1.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/101019 New Contracts and Tenders 500 Data Panel Paper IC GS V1.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
    - filename: 101020_LOCAL PUBLIC DATA PANEL PROGRESS REPORT.doc
      url: https://data.gov.uk/sites/default/files/101020_LOCAL PUBLIC DATA PANEL PROGRESS REPORT.doc
      mimetype: application/msword
categories:
    - Government
---

<p><strong>Meeting note </strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Panel</u></strong><strong>:</strong> Professor Nigel Shadbolt (Chair), Tim Allen (Local Government Association), Janet Hughes (London Assembly), Roger Hampson (Redbridge Borough Council), Chris Taggart (Openlylocal.com), Tom Baker (for Dave Smith - Sunderland City Council), Colin McManus (for Jos Creese - Hampshire County Council), Nick Aldridge (Mission Fish) – Ex Officio: Andrew Stott (Cabinet Office), Hulya Mustafa (DCLG).</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Apologies</u></strong>: William Perrin (Talk About Local)</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Other Attendees:</u></strong><strong> </strong>Baroness Hanham (items 2-4), Councillor Liam Maxwell (Royal Borough of Windsor &amp; Maidenhead Borough Council), Cat Drew (Home Office) and Julie Wyeth (DCLG) (all item 2 only), Jonathan Bamford (Information Commissioner’s Office (item 2- 4) Julie Carney (DCLG - item 3).</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Secretariat:</u></strong><strong> </strong>Philip Worsfold and Stuart Macleod.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 1: Minutes / Matters Arising</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">Minutes of the 9 September meeting were agreed.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">Since the Panel’s response to the Health White Paper, the Department of Health had published an “Information Revolution” document, which raised data issues and the future role of Commissioning Boards. The Panel needed to agree a view on these proposals.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><br /><strong>Action:</strong> <strong>Janet Hughes to develop initial response prior to next meeting.</strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 2: Crime, Police and Justice Data</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">Councillor Liam Maxwell was invited to introduce the Royal Borough of Windsor &amp; Maidenhead project on crime data. This was intended to increase transparency, improve the response to reported crime and to address public perceptions that crime data was incorrect. The policy intent was for street level crime data to be published from January 2011. Not all recorded crime would be published; instead the focus was burglary, robbery, violent crime and theft. These crimes, along with anti-social behaviour, were those where public pressure could most usefully shape police action. The Borough Commander was supportive and fully engaged. There had also been discussion with the Information Commissioner’s Office to ensure the scope of proposals were correct.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">Cat Drew explained the Home Office’s own plans for crime data to be published at ‘street level’ from January 2011. The project scope was similar to that planned in Windsor &amp; Maidenhead and intended as a basis for more crime data to be released in the future. An important consideration was to get right the geographical scale for data. Options included publication at postcode or to the nearest ‘large street’ or intersection. Work was also underway to develop ‘virtual beat meetings’ so that the police was able to provide additional context to the data of interest to people in a more convenient, accessible way.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Panel’s views were sought and the key points were:</p>
<ul><li> There was a risk that the full benefits of the project would be missed if the data did not cover the full lifecycle from police action through to the criminal justice system. </li>
<li> It was important to move beyond the production of crime heat maps, which blurred the data and reduced its usefulness. Street level data, depending on how that was defined, could be unhelpful unless individual crimes were identifiable and “pinned”. </li>
<li> The availability and form of the raw data was as important as how the data was presented if it was to be used more broadly by developers to enable comparison across or other public services and to help drive efficiency. </li>
<li> Competing public interest tests needed to be balanced; there were data protection concerns and the potential for repeat victimisation, for example incidents of domestic violence or burglary. Navigating these might affect the pace of implementation. </li>
<li> There may be a need for some ‘anonymisation’ of the data, which needed consideration but this should not prove an insurmountable barrier.</li>
<li>People should be consulted on what crime data they wanted to see published for example on environmental crime. Data would then generated by public demand. </li>
<li> The need for data to be submitted by police forces to the Home Office before publication was questioned. The Panel agreed it would be more efficient and timely if forces simply published the information themselves. It was important, therefore, that the ability to liberalise arrangements at an appropriate point in the future.</li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left">The Chair said there needed to be a degree of pragmatism working to the January 2011 timetable but it was important to adhere to the Public Data Principles . The Panel supported efforts to publish this data and was ready to scrutinise and challenge progress. The Home Office was asked to include the Panel in work going forward. The discussion also highlighted the benefit of attendance from external organisations. This should be considered for future agendas.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Actions<em>:</em></strong></p>
<ul><li> <strong>Councillor Liam Maxwell to circulate the proto-type crime map to the Panel.</strong> </li>
<li> <strong>The Home Office to clarify plans on the proposed data and the handling of it.</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 3: Future Data Sources</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">The implications of reduced national and regional data sets were discussed. It was clear that, as a number of public bodies were merged or abolished, a number of useful data sets could be at risk. Much of this information could be archived but, if not handled quickly and comprehensively, datasets could be lost.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">There was work underway in the National Archives on handling data of central bodies that were to be closed. Data not published would be held in Kew under normal 30 year rule requirements. The Audit Commission, as one public body affected, was proactively considering how to handle it data sets. However the Panel agreed it would be beneficial to support public bodies that were being closed to ensure data was published for future use through, for example, data.gov.uk. Simple advice was needed.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action:</strong></p>
<ul><li> <strong>Hulya Mustafa and Janet Hughes to develop advice and contact the Efficiency &amp; Reform Group in the Cabinet Office.</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left">The Panel also discussed plans to replace the National Indicator Set. Baroness Hanham set out the Government’s intention to establish a single list of data required by Government from local authorities and to reduce it over time. This was intended to reduce data collection burdens but also maintain accountability.</p>
<ul><li> It was recognised that central Government would need some locally sourced data but that the amount needed to be limited. </li>
<li> A better model for production was for local authorities to collect and publish data rather than to collect and submit to the Secretary of State. This was more efficient and able to closely reflect public demand. It should be considered as the basis for future data collection plans. </li>
<li> Consistency and comparability of data also remained a crucial consideration. There was a discussion about who should lead defining standards and formatting to ensure comparability. Often Government stipulated that data be produced by councils in ‘an acceptable format’ and it was left to a sectoral body such as CIPFA to decide what that would be. However there was an opposing view that giving a particular body a role in defining formats leads to proprietary formats. This needed to be resolved – it was unacceptable to have to pay for the infrastructure necessary to interpret public data.</li>
<li>The proposed consultation on the single data list provided a good opportunity for an overall audit on the data that people have found locally useful. The Panel would assist as required.</li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action:</strong><em> </em></p>
<ul><li> <strong>DCLG to produce a progress report for the next meeting. </strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 4: Data from Private Companies providing Public Services</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">As more public services were provided by private companies or charities it was necessary to ensure transparency and public data was provided. Suffolk County Council had, for example, announced its intention to outsource all services with other local authorities likely to consider this approach.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Scottish Government was currently extending Freedom of Information arrangements with regard to open data, including designating additional public bodies, some private suppliers and covering Private Finance Initiatives.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">This prompted the need for a further examination of what was happening in England. Consideration was being given to extension of the Freedom of Information Act to a small number of additional bodies such as Network Rail. Amendments to FOI Act were attractive as these could be implemented through Publication Schemes and regulated by the Information Commissioner. However, the provision of data needed to be considered as a standard part of procurement as transparency would be needed around a particular service funded by public money, not necessarily the whole company’s business.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">It was essential to avoid a situation where outsourcing of services was used as a means of avoiding scrutiny and limiting transparency. The Panel agreed to develop a full view on how best to handle this issue and present it to the appropriate Ministers.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action: </strong></p>
<ul><li> <strong>DCLG to discuss with CO and report back on the best time and way to raise the matter with Ministers.</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 5: Progress Report</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Panel was updated on activities since the September meeting.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">Action was underway across all areas of the strategy. It was clear that greater effort was required to sell the benefits of open and comparable data to public bodies and the public. There was also scepticism in local government that needed to be addressed: actions thus far were too easily countered as being too mechanistic and an imposition from outside of the authority. The agenda needed to help bring to life other opportunities for public bodies. Examples of how systems had been changed and how data had been picked up were needed to support this and the Panel was keen to pull together case studies in an easy-to-access format. The Panel had a role in challenging sceptics and future projects provided an opportunity to this end.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action:</strong></p>
<ul><li> <strong>The Panel wanted to consider options for a handbook of case studies</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left">Baroness Hanham then left the meeting.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Item 6: Future Projects</u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Panel discussed the potential to support projects linked to the three areas of its strategy: Ensuring local authorities and other bodies engage with the spirit of transparency, moving towards open and standardised data; and capacity building, and work on skills and demand. Work was underway in DCLG to ensure suitable arrangements were in place. There was interest in exploring further how small grants could be provided or a competition established so that the Panel could issue a call to action.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Panel was interested in small-scale, quickly delivered projects. In taking this approach, it was important to recognise that projects might not come together as originally intended and that ‘failure’ was not to be avoided at all costs. The Panel agreed that what mattered more was to capture the learning and for this to be publicly shared.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">Raising awareness of local data and associated issues was considered to be a priority area for action. This needed to be tackled through a variety of means, including projects and ongoing relationships with other bodies including NESTA, local government and elsewhere.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Panel also discussed a project proposal from Openly Local on local government accounts (<a href="http://countculture.wordpress.com/2010/10/20/opening-up-council-accounts%e2%80%a6-and-open-procurement/" title="http://countculture.wordpress.com/2010/10/20/opening-up-council-accountsâ€¦-and-open-procurement/">http://countculture.wordpress.com/2010/10/20/opening-up-council-accounts%e2%80%a6-and-open-procurement/</a>). Chris Taggart left the meeting during discussion of the proposal.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">No conclusion was reached on whether to endorse the proposal – further discussions would follow between the Secretariat and Openly Local.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action: </strong></p>
<ul><li> <strong>DCLG to confirm grant / competition arrangements in advance of next Panel meeting and propose criteria for projects.</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong><u>Any Other Business </u></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left">Janet Hughes and Will Perrin had agreed to participate in the steering group for West Midlands Timely Information for Citizens event<strong> </strong>later in the year. Chris Taggart asked to be kept in touch.</p>
<p style="text-align:left">The Local Government Group had conducted further work on the publication of contracts and tenders. Further discussion was needed to work through issues related to the potential for fraud. The Local Government Group had advised that until a clear public sector position was agreed, councils should not publish VAT numbers and supplier IDs. However, not publishing VAT numbers and supplier IDs did not provide guarantees on security.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action:</strong></p>
<ul><li><strong>DCLG to set up a discussion on fraud with a report back for next meeting. </strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left">Work to develop the Elgin project (<a href="http://www.elgin.gov.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=streetworks.streetworksHome&amp;ORGANISATION_ID=0&amp;API=0&amp;INSERTHTMLHEAD=true&amp;LOGOUT=0&amp;CHK_LAAREA=not%5Fset&amp;DBUG=0&amp;">http://www.elgin.gov.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=streetworks.streetworksHome&amp;ORGANISATION_ID=0&amp;API=0&amp;INSERTHTMLHEAD=true&amp;LOGOUT=0&amp;CHK_LAAREA=not%5Fset&amp;DBUG=0&amp;</a>) highlighted a need to more clearly articulate how public data could underpin a private business model.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Action:</strong></p>
<ul><li><strong>DCLG to bring together Luke Spikes and Elgin to discuss the Spikes Cavell business model; and to work that up into a general model that could be used in future. DCLG also to engage with DfT and BIS to see what interest there was around Government in the Elgin work.</strong></li>
</ul><p style="text-align:left"><strong>Date of next meeting</strong>: 16<sup>th</sup> December, 2-4.30pm. DCLG will re-circulate times and dates for proposed meetings in first quarter of 2011 for the Panel to agree.</p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>Local Public Data Panel Secretariat</strong></p>
<p style="text-align:left"><strong>25 October 2010</strong></p>
